HAMLET
by William Shakespeare

ACT I, SCENE I

Barnardo: Who's there?
Francisco: Nay, answer me: stand, and unfold yourself.
Barnardo: Long live the king!
Francisco: Barnardo?
Barnardo: He.
Francisco: You come most carefully upon your hour.
Barnardo: 'Tis now struck twelve; get thee to bed, Francisco.
Francisco: For this relief much thanks: 'tis bitter cold, and I am sick at heart.
Barnardo: Have you had quiet guard?
Francisco: Not a mouse stirring.
Barnardo: Well, good night. If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus, the rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
Francisco: I think I hear them. Stand, ho! Who's there?

Horatio: Friends to this ground.
Marcellus: And liegemen to the Dane.
Francisco: Give you good night.
Marcellus: O, farewell, honest soldier: who hath relieved you?
Francisco: Barnardo has my place. Give you good night.

Marcellus: Holla! Barnardo!
Barnardo: Say, what, is Horatio there?
Horatio: A piece of him.
Barnardo: Welcome, Horatio: welcome, good Marcellus.
Marcellus: What, has this thing appear'd again to-night?
Barnardo: I have seen nothing.
Marcellus: Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy, and will not let belief take hold of him touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us: therefore I have entreated him along with us to watch the minutes of this night; that if again this apparition come, he may approve our eyes and speak to it.
Horatio: Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.
Barnardo: Sit down awhile; and let us once again assail your ears, that are so fortified against our story what we have two nights seen.
Horatio: Well, sit we down, and let us hear Barnardo speak of this.

Barnardo: Last night of all, when yond same star that's westward from the pole had made his course to illume that part of heaven where now it burns, Marcellus and myself, the bell then beating one--

Marcellus: Peace, break thee off; look, where it comes again!
Barnardo: In the same figure, like the king that's dead.
Marcellus: Thou art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio.
Barnardo: Looks it not like the king? mark it, Horatio.
Horatio: Most like: it harrows me with fear and wonder.
Barnardo: It would be spoke to.
Marcellus: Question it, Horatio.
Horatio: What art thou that usurp'st this time of night, together with that fair and warlike form in which the majesty of buried Denmark did sometimes march? by heaven I charge thee, speak!
Marcellus: It is offended.
Barnardo: See, it stalks away!
Horatio: Stay! speak, speak! I charge thee, speak!
Marcellus: 'Tis gone, and will not answer.
Barnardo: How now, Horatio! you tremble and look pale: is not this something more than fantasy? What think you on't?
Horatio: Before my God, I might not this believe without the sensible and true avouch of mine own eyes.
Marcellus: Is it not like the king?
Horatio: As thou art to thyself: such was the very armour he had on when he the ambitious Norway combated; so frown'd he once, when, in an angry parle, he smote the sledded Polacks on the ice. 'Tis strange.
Marcellus: Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour, with martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
Horatio: In what particular thought to work I know not; but in the gross and scope of my opinion, this bodes some strange eruption to our state.
Marcellus: Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows, why this same strict and most observant watch so nightly toils the subject of the land, and why such daily cast of brazen cannon, and foreign mart for implements of war; why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task does not divide the Sunday from the week; what might be toward, that this sweaty haste doth make the night joint-labourer with the day: who is't that can inform me?
Horatio: That can I; at least, the whisper goes so. Our last king, whose image even but now appear'd to us, was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway, thereto prick'd on by a most emulate pride, dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet did slay this Fortinbras; who by a seal'd compact, well ratified by law and heraldry, did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands which he stood seized of, to the conqueror: against the which, a moiety competent was gaged by our king; which had return'd to the inheritance of Fortinbras, had he been vanquisher; as, by the same covenant, and carriage of the article design'd, his fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras, of unimproved mettle hot and full, hath in the skirts of Norway here and there shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes, for food and diet, to some enterprise that hath a stomach in't; which is no other-- as it doth well appear unto our state-- but to recover of us, by strong hand and terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands so by his father lost: and this, I take it, is the main motive of our preparations, the source of this our watch and the chief head of this post-haste and romage in the land.
Barnardo: I think it be no other but e'en so: well may it sort that this portentous figure comes armed through our watch; so like the king that was and is the question of these wars.
Horatio: A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye. In the most high and palmy state of Rome, a little ere the mightiest Julius fell, the graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets: as stars with trains of fire and dews of blood, disasters in the sun; and the moist star upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse: and even the like precurse of fierce events, as harbingers preceding still the fates and prologue to the omen coming on, have heaven and earth together demonstrated unto our climatures and countrymen.

ACT I, SCENE II

King: Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death the memory be green, and that it us befitted to bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom to be contracted in one brow of woe, yet so far hath discretion fought with nature that we with wisest sorrow think on him, together with remembrance of ourselves. Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen, the imperial jointress to this warlike state, have we, as 'twere with a defeated joy, with an auspicious and a dropping eye, with mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage, in equal scale weighing delight and dole, taken to wife: nor have we herein barr'd your better wisdoms, which have freely gone with this affair along. For all, our thanks.
Hamlet: O, that this too too solid flesh would melt, thaw and resolve itself into a dew! Or that the Everlasting had not fix'd his canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God! God! How weary, stale, flat and unprofitable, seem to me all the uses of this world! Fie on't! ah fie! 'tis an unweeded garden, that grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature possess it merely. That it should come to this! But two months dead: nay, not so much, not two: so excellent a king; that was, to this, Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother that he might not beteem the winds of heaven visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth! Must I remember? why, she would hang on him, as if increase of appetite had grown by what it fed on: and yet, within a month-- let me not think on't-- Frailty, thy name is woman!-- A little month, or ere those shoes were old with which she follow'd my poor father's body, like Niobe, all tears:-- why she, even she-- O, God! a beast, that wants discourse of reason, would have mourn'd longer-- married with my uncle, my father's brother, but no more like my father than I to Hercules: within a month: ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears had left the flushing in her gallied eyes, she married. O, most wicked speed, to post with such dexterity to incestuous sheets! It is not nor it cannot come to good: but break, my heart; for I must hold my tongue.
Horatio: Hail to your lordship!
Hamlet: I am glad to see you well: Horatio,-- or I do forget myself.
Horatio: The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
Hamlet: Sir, my good friend; I'll change that name with you: and what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?
Horatio: A truant disposition, good my lord.
Hamlet: I would not hear your enemy say so, nor shall you do mine ear that violence, to make it truster of your own report against yourself: I know you are no truant. But what is your affair in Elsinore?
Horatio: My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.
Hamlet: I pray thee, do not mock me, fellow-student; I think it was to see my mother's wedding.
Horatio: Indeed, my lord, it follow'd hard upon.
Hamlet: Thrift, thrift, Horatio! the funeral baked meats did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables. Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven or ever I had seen that day, Horatio! My father!-- methinks I see my father.
Horatio: Where, my lord?
Hamlet: In my mind's eye, Horatio.
Horatio: I saw him once; he was a good king.
Hamlet: He was a man, take him for all in all, I shall not look upon his like again.
Horatio: My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
Hamlet: Saw? who?
Horatio: My lord, the king your father.
Hamlet: The king my father!
Horatio: Season your admiration for a while with an attent ear, till I may deliver, upon the witness of these gentlemen, this marvel to you.
Hamlet: For God's love, let me hear.